Christmas.
Here's something that you might not know about Christmas.
For the first few hundred years of the church, Christians largely did not celebrate it.
Merry Christmas.
No nativity scenes, no special services, not even a feast.
Early Christians didn't celebrate anyone's birthday, actually.
Not even Jesus.
They celebrated the day someone died, which is a weird thing to say to celebrate the day someone died.
But the reason is, is for Christians, the day someone died, it was their heavenly birthday.
So the earliest Christians absolutely celebrated something, but it wasn't in Bethlehem.
It was the cross.
It was the resurrection.
Christmas the holiday.
that the whole world knows today actually came much later.
Before the fourth century, Christians in the east celebrated something called Epiphany, which basically rolled together Jesus' birth, his baptism, and the visit of the Magi.
But in Rome, in the west, no Christmas.
And then something happened.
The church found itself in a heated debate about one essential question.
Who exactly is Jesus?
Fully God?
Fully man?
Somewhere in between?
The debates were raging, and in the moment Christians rediscovered the truth at the center of their faith.
God became flesh.
The eternal Son stepped into time and space.
So for the first time believers in Rome,
Set aside a day to celebrate Jesus' birth.
And they chose December 25th.
Not because they knew his exact birthday.
You can see all sorts of people if you want to debate when Jesus was actually born.
Some will say like March.
I even read somewhere September recently, which I really want to dig into and find that out more.
But it doesn't matter because it wasn't to get his birth date precise.
Instead, the Roman world already celebrated the winter solstice.
It was the unconquered sun where light begins pushing back the darkness, and Christians looked at that season that time, and they said, that's the perfect day to celebrate the true light of the world.
So they didn't cancel the festival.
They transformed it.
And by the end of the fourth century,
Christmas spread across the Christian world, not as a sentimental tradition, but as a bold declaration that God came, that God entered, that God drew near, that God took on flesh.
But here's what's fascinating.
From the very beginning, the church celebrated Christmas because of what came after Christmas.
The manger mattered because the tomb is empty.
The birth mattered because of the resurrection.
Christmas was never meant to stand alone.
It was always meant to be the beginning of God's story of our salvation.
And that means the manger isn't just a doctrine that we believe, or we go around saying, Jesus is the reason for the season,
It's a doorway to the God who steps into real human life.
So in Luke chapter two, the angels announce the arrival of the Savior.
And then in 1 Corinthians 15, our core passage today, Paul tells us what that Savior accomplished.
The message of Christmas isn't simply that Jesus was born.
It's that the one who was born is the one who conquered death.
And that truth isn't just something the early church believed, it's something we still have to learn how to live with, especially when life is heavy.
Now that's all fascinating history about when Christmas as a December 25th holiday came to fruition, but here's why it really matters.
I love Christmas, I really do, honestly.
But I've had years where the joy of the season collided with the real weight of life.
And knowing you all, I know that that's true of you too, whether right now or whether in previous years.
And because Christmas didn't start as a feel-good holiday, it didn't start as a season of nostalgia, lights, or warm traditions.
It started as a declaration of hope.
A hope big enough to hold the weight of real life.
And if we're being honest for many of us, that's exactly what we need right now is that hope.
The hope, not a frail hope, but a hope that what God has already done gives us hope for what will come.
Because while Christmas is supposed to be a season of joy, it's also the season where life feels heaviest.
For some of us in this room, Christmas is a reminder of someone who isn't here anymore.
Our relationship that didn't heal, or a dream that didn't work out, or a struggle that won't go away.
For some of us, Christmas exposes financial pressure, family, tension, loneliness, questions about the future,
that we don't know the answer to.
And I've had Christmases like that too.
In fact, honestly, this one's felt like it.
We have had illness run through our house since mid-November.
It has been like one of us getting sick after the other after the other after the other.
I think we're playing illness volleyball.
It's not a fun game, but we decided to play it this season.
And in those seasons, the questions of our hearts
get louder than the songs on the radio.
And the thing is, you can feel all of that, all of that heaviness, all that weightiness, all of those questions, all that turmoil while you're sitting next to a twinkling Christmas tree.
I've had Christmases like that where everything around me felt festive, but inside, life was anything but simple.
Because the lights are beautiful, the music is familiar,
The traditions are comforting, but none of that fixes the questions we carry into the season.
Will things ever get better?
Is there any real hope for my situation?
Has God forgotten me?
Does any of this faith stuff actually change anything?
Or is it just something we say?
And this is where the Christmas story, the real Christmas story, speaks louder than sentiment.
But as God did not send angels to say, unto you is born a new holiday.
He didn't send shepherds home singing carols and sipping cocoa, although who doesn't like hot cocoa?
I mean, come on.
No, he sent them a savior.
A savior born into a world as broken as ours is today.
A savior who came not to decorate our lives, but to deliver us.
a Savior whose birth was never meant to stand alone because the manger was always pointing towards something more.
And this is the tension that we live in today.
It's possible to celebrate the birth of Jesus and still miss out on the hope of Jesus.
It's possible to love the Christmas story and still struggle to believe it changes our story.
Let's be honest, that's where some of us are
right now, today.
So the question we wrestle with today is simple and honest.
What kind of hope does Christmas really offer us?
A seasonal uplift, a sentimental escape from reality, or something strong enough to anchor us in the hardest places of life.
Luke 2 gives us the announcement, and we're going to read it in a moment, but 1 Corinthians 15 shows us the outcome.
Christmas shows us that God came near and Easter shows us why he came.
And when you put these two together, you get the kind of hope that actually carries ordinary people like us through real life.
That's the hope we're going to talk about today.
So I want us to take a moment this morning and slow down and listen again to the story where the hope was first announced.
to do your best to imagine Linus has come out with his blanket ready to tell you the story this morning.
Here's what it says in Luke chapter two verses eight through 20.
In the same region shepherds were staying out in the fields and keeping watch at night over their flock.
Then an angel of the Lord stood before them and the glory of the Lord shone around them
And they were terrified, but the angel said to them, do not be afraid.
I proclaim to you good news of great joy that will be for all people.
Today in the city of David, a Savior was born for you who is the Messiah, the Lord.
This will be a sign for you.
You will find a baby wrapped tightly in cloth and lying in a manger.
Suddenly there was a multitude of the heavenly hosts with the angel praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest heaven and peace on earth to people he favors.
When the angels had left them and returned to heaven, the shepherd said to one another, let's go straight to Bethlehem and see what has happened, which the Lord has made known to us.
They hurried off and found both Mary and Joseph and the baby who was lying in the manger.
After seeing them, they reported the message they were told about this child, and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them.
But Mary was treasuring up all these things in her heart and meditating on them.
The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had seen and heard, which were just as they had been told.
So right there, Luke
shows us how hope arrived, and we'll come back to it in a moment.
But I want to turn for a moment and read how Paul shows us what hope accomplished.
He writes in 1 Corinthians 15, 3 through 4, for I pass on to you as most important what I also receive, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures.
that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the scriptures.
And moving ahead to verse 20, he says, but as it is, Christ has been raised from the dead.
The first fruits of those who have fallen asleep.
For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead also came through a man.
For just as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.
Before we talk about what Christmas means for us today, we need to see what the Scripture is actually telling us, because Luke 2 in 1 Corinthians 15 are not disconnected stories.
There are two chapters of the same rescue mission.
In fact, what's really intriguing about Luke is Luke, the writer of the Gospel of Luke, is also the writer of the Book of Acts, which chronicles Paul's story, the Paul who wrote 1 Corinthians 15.
In fact, Luke
begins using the first person plural we when he's telling the story of Paul's journey as if he is with him on the journey.
So it's kind of cool to hear what Luke writes about the birth of Jesus and to see what Paul Luke's companion has to say about the resurrection.
One begins in a manger and the other ends at an empty tomb and both reveal the same savior.
So let's start with Luke 2.
In Luke 2, in the first couple verses, we get the announcement of hope.
When the angels appear the shepherds, they say, do not be afraid.
I bring you good news that will bring joy to all people.
The Savior, the Messiah, the Lord, has been born today in Bethlehem.
Right away, Luke shows us something stunning in the angel's declaration to the shepherds.
God announces the birth of Jesus, not to the powerful, not to the religious elite, not to the people that anybody reading this book in the ancient world would expect, but to shepherds, to lowly shepherds, to the poor, the overlooked, the unseen.
This is God's way of saying the Savior is for everyone, especially those who think He couldn't possibly be for them.
And spiritually speaking, that's all of us.
The shepherds respond by doing the very first thing disciples always do.
They go to see Jesus, they receive the good news by what they witness, and then they run and they tell everyone what they have seen.
Luke says that they spread the word and could not stop talking about what was revealed to them.
Why?
Because what they saw wasn't just a baby.
It was the beginning of God's promise rescue.
They had heard the angels proclaim two realities at once.
Glory to God in the highest, what is happening in heaven, and peace on earth, what God is doing here through Jesus.
Christmas is not a sentiment.
It is not nostalgia.
It is not a comforting tradition.
It is God stepping into human history to fulfill every promise he ever made.
But announcement only matters if it leads to action.
And that's where Paul takes us in 1 Corinthians 15.
Paul says, Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures.
He was buried.
He was raised on the third day according to the scriptures.
Paul is telling the Corinthians and us that the Christmas story was always meant to lead somewhere.
The birth in Bethlehem leads to the cross in Jerusalem.
And the cross leads to the tomb.
And the tomb leads to resurrection life.
Paul is drawing a straight line from the manger to the empty tomb.
In fact, here's a fun fact.
I love being nerdy, sorry.
The funny thing about the tomb
is that oftentimes when we read about the inn where Jesus was born, we get our minds set on like a hotel and there's no room there.
What actually happened was that Jesus was born in a cave or a tomb-like structure, rock hewn out where animals were at.
He was almost born in a tomb and then, well, raised from the dead to leave.
a tomb.
Kind of a fun little fact.
Anyway, Merry Christmas again.
So, the child who was born is the Christ who died.
The Christ who died is the Lord who rose.
And the Lord who rose is the King who now reigns.
This story is not a myth, it's not just mere symbolism.
Paul roots it in eyewitness testimony.
He heard from the first of Jesus' disciples on through the other people and then was the last to witness the resurrected Jesus.
He says he's the last and the loneliest of all.
Hundreds of people, many still alive at the time that Paul's writing, saw Jesus risen.
Christianity does not rest on warm holiday feelings.
It stands or falls on the historical resurrection of Christ.
which leads Paul to his next point, which is when he writes that Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the first fruits of those who have fallen asleep.
For as in Adam all dies, so in Christ all will be made alive.
In other words, Jesus's resurrection is not just his victory, it is the guarantee of ours.
He is the first fruits.
The opening chapter of a harvest that's coming.
The resurrection is not only a past event, it is a future promise.
And that future promise flows directly from the birth that happened in Luke 2.
The baby born in Bethlehem is the beginning of new creation, a world where death is defeated and where every person who belongs to Christ will rise with him one day.
So when you put Luke 2 and 1 Corinthians 15 together, the message is unmistakable.
We have hope announced at Christmas that is fulfilled in Easter.
The Savior born in a manger is the Savior raised from the dead.
The child wrapped in cloths is the king who conquered death.
Christmas is not complete without resurrection.
And resurrection doesn't make sense without incarnation.
That God came in the flesh.
and together they reveal the whole of the gospel.
God comes near, God dies for us, God rises for us, God reigns for us, and God will one day raise us to.
This is not a seasonal story, it is a salvation story.
It is the story of a God who keeps his promises
from the manger to the cross to the empty tomb to your and my life today.
So when he traced the story from Bethlehem to the empty tomb, one truth becomes impossible to miss.
It's our bottom line today.
Hope began in a manger and became realized at the empty tomb.
Hope began in the manger and became realized at the empty tomb.
So if Christmas is the beginning of hope,
And the resurrection is the fulfillment of that hope.
What does that actually mean for us this week?
It means the gospel doesn't just explain our faith.
It reshapes how we live inside our real circumstances.
It means more than a beautiful story, more than a cherished tradition, more than a theological truth we affirm.
It means hope is not seasonal.
It's available now.
It's alive.
It's present, it's personal, and it is stronger than whatever you walked in carrying today.
Here's what it looks like in real life.
Because of the manger, you are not alone.
You are not alone.
Christmas means that God came near.
That's why we celebrate that theological word incarnation because God came in the flesh and he came near.
Even the lowliest
of people matter to God, even if they feel overlooked in the world they reside.
He came near to the poor, near to the overlooked, near to the anxious, near to the exhausted, near to the broken.
So when you feel forgotten or unseen or buried under the pressure,
The incarnation tells you God stepped into your world so you would never walk through it alone.
Never ever.
That's not poetic, it's absolutely practical.
It means that in every fear, every decision, every hardship that you face, here, tomorrow, yesterday, and beyond, God is with you.
It also means that because of the cross, you are deeply loved.
Jesus wasn't just born, he came to give his life.
The manger points to the mission.
The child of Bethlehem grew up to carry the cross in Jerusalem.
And the cross tells you, your sin does not disqualify you from God's love.
It is the very reason that Christ came.
So when you feel unworthy or ashamed or spiritually stuck, Christmas leads you
to the cross where Jesus says, I came because you couldn't fix yourself.
And I love you enough to make you new.
And that hope also tells us that because of the empty tomb, your future is secure.
This is where 1 Corinthians 15 speaks directly into our daily fears, our fear of death, our fear of disease, our fear of loss,
are fear of what comes next, a fear of the unknown.
The resurrection answers all of it.
Paul calls Jesus the first fruits, meaning that his resurrection is not just life altering and world altering, it is a preview, the guarantee, the down payment of your resurrected life.
If Christ is alive and hope is alive and if Christ rose, then you will rise too.
And if Christ conquered death, then death does not have the last word over your story.
That is not abstract doctrine.
It is everyday courage.
It means you can face tomorrow without fear of ultimate loss because God's got this.
Because of that same hope, because Christ is risen,
Your suffering is not pointless.
Christmas tells us God entered into suffering.
The resurrection tells us God will end suffering.
So when life hurts, and for many people, the holidays magnify the hurt.
Because everybody's telling you that you should feel happy, that you should buy stuff, that everything should be roses all the time.
But the gospel reminds you that your pain is not wasted.
Your tears are not unnoticed.
Your story is not over, and resurrection is coming.
This gives real comfort and real grief.
And lastly, because of Jesus, you have a hope that walks with you, not just a hope, you remember.
Christmas is not a sentimental escape, and Easter is not a theological footnote.
Together they give you living hope that studies your emotions
anchors your identity in Christ, reframes your circumstances, strengthens your faith, and restores your joy.
It carries you through any hardship that you're facing, and it reminds you who holds the future in his hands.
This is the hope that began in a manger and was secured forever at an empty tomb.
So here's a simple question for us this Christmas.
Where do you need the hope of Christmas to meet you right now?
Are you worried about your future?
Does a relationship that you have feel fragile is grief heavier for you during the holidays?
I know it is for many.
Is there a sin that you cannot seem to shake?
Alonliness that you're trying to hide
A situation that you can't quite fix.
Is there a fear that you can't shake?
Christmas isn't asking you to pretend everything is fine.
Even if that's the messaging of the world around us.
If you're carrying any of that today, you're not failing at faith.
You're exactly where the story meets you.
Christmas is telling you that hope came for you.
And the resurrection tells you hope is alive for you.
The God who came near in Bethlehem is the God who defeated death in Jerusalem and the God who walks with you today.
When he came in, I hope that you got a communion packet.
When we take communion each Sunday, we are obedient to the command of Jesus
to eat the bread and drink of the cup in remembrance of Him.
But when we take communion, we proclaim the gospel message from the manger to the empty tomb.
Because we recognize that Jesus came in the flesh to give His life as a ransom for many.
And we proclaim that God the Father took up His life by the power of the Spirit on the third day and the tomb was empty.
When we take communion, we remember the Christmas story and the gospel message and the hope we have in the resurrection.
So I'm gonna give you a moment to pause and reflect on the goodness of God and the wonderful message at Christmas.
And after that moment of reflection, we'll take communion together as one church family.
I invite each and every one of you to take the bread and eat.
This represents his body, which is given for us.
And in like manner, I invite you to take and drink from this cup.
This represents his blood, which is poured out for us.
Please pray with me.
your Lord God, we thank you for this morning where we can worship you through song.
Hear your word and reflect on this Christmas story that we celebrate each time, each year at this time.
And Lord, I pray that as we go about doing the things that we do and living out the hustle of this season,
I pray that you'll give us moments to pause and to reflect, not just on the story, but on the truth that you have come near to us, that even though life gets hectic, that it gets difficult, that we have seemingly unanswerable questions about life, relationships, health, whatever it is,
that you haven't left us to our own devices, but that you broke into our world with grace.
And I pray that that story, that truth, that moment in time that is still living today, I pray that it will lift us up, give us hope, and help us to walk through life, not only to glorify you, but
within your strength.
We thank you so much for loving us, and we thank you so much for sending your son Jesus.
And it's in his name that we pray.
Amen.